# Household-Power-Consumption-Analysis-and-Forecasting

# Abstract

There has been a huge amount of data generated by the power
industry in the recent years due to the popularity of smart electrical
appliances and home energy management systems . This data can
be beneficial for the utility as it provides the behavior patterns of
customers, and thus useful decisions can be made to optimize the
load on the grid. Our goal for this project is to help the utility
companies design better demand side management (DSM) programs
to ensure efficient transmission and distribution of energy. This
solves the problem of balancing electric demand and supply at the
grid and will also reduce the peak demands, which helps lower
the electricity bills for the consumers. In this context, we analyze
the household electricity consumption data, and determine how it
is effected by various factors including consumer’s demographics,
weather data and dynamic time-of-use pricing. We also develop a
forecasting model to predict the energy consumption, and make
recommendations to the consumers ahead in time to reduce their
load and minimize their monthly bill. To this end, we use Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNN) with Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
neurons (also known as LSTM networks) as well as Support Vector
Regression with Gaussian kernel. We evaluate their performance
using Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) metric. 


# Dataset: 
We used Low Carbon London (LCL) project dataset available from UK
Data Service, London weather dataset from Dark Sky API, and UK
bank holidays data from GOV.UK.
